README.md, before:

# **Agentic RAG System: A Production-Grade Conversational AI**

This repository contains the source code for a sophisticated, local-first Agentic Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system. Which means the entire data processing and storage pipeline is designed to run locally, without sending your private documents to a third-party service for indexing or storage.

The application is designed from the ground up to be a production-ready, containerized solution that can ingest custom documents, maintain multi-turn conversations, and provide factually-grounded, cited answers.

This project moves beyond simple RAG chains by implementing a stateful, multi-agent architecture using LangGraph. It includes advanced features like conversational memory, automatic history summarization for token efficiency, and a final grounding-and-safety check to prevent hallucinations and ensure trustworthiness.

---

## **Core Features**

* **Conversational Memory**: The agent remembers the context of previous interactions in a session, allowing for natural, multi-turn follow-up questions.
* **Efficient History Summarization**: To handle long conversations without exceeding token limits, the agent automatically creates rolling summaries of the chat history, ensuring both context retention and cost efficiency.
* **Grounding & Safety Agent**: Every answer is passed through a final validation node that fact-checks the generated response against the source documents to prevent hallucinations.
* **Dynamic Citations**: The safety agent adds specific, numbered citations to the final answer, referencing the source documents that support its claims, which adds a layer of credibility and verifiability.
* **Token Usage Tracking**: The system tracks and displays the token consumption (prompt, completion, and total) for every turn of the conversation, providing clear visibility into API costs.
* **Local-First & Containerized**: The entire application, including the vector database and the backend API, runs locally in a containerized environment using Docker, ensuring consistency and portability.
* **Structured Logging**: All application events are logged in a structured JSON format, making it easy to monitor, query, and analyze the system's behavior in a production environment.
* **Memory-Efficient Ingestion**: The system uses a streaming approach to parse and chunk large documents, ensuring that even very large files can be processed without overwhelming the system's memory.

---

## **System Architecture**

The application is composed of several services that are orchestrated by Docker Compose:

1. **Weaviate Vector Store**: A containerized vector database that stores the embedded document chunks for fast retrieval.
2. **FastAPI Backend**: A containerized backend service that hosts the agentic workflow. It exposes a simple API for the user interface to interact with.
3. **LangGraph Agent**: The core logic of the application, defined as a stateful graph. The graph orchestrates the flow of a query through several nodes: document retrieval, history summarization, answer generation, and a final safety check.
4. **Streamlit UI**: A simple, local web interface that allows users to interact with the backend API in a conversational manner.

---

## **Tech Stack & Key Libraries**

* **Orchestration**: LangGraph, LangChain
* **Backend**: FastAPI, Uvicorn
* **Frontend**: Streamlit
* **Containerization**: Docker, Docker Compose
* **Vector Database**: Weaviate
* **Dependency Management**: Poetry
* **Logging**: `python-json-logger`
* **Key Python Libraries**:
    * `pydantic-settings`: For managing configuration and secrets.
    * `sentence-transformers`: For creating high-quality text embeddings.
    * `langchain-openai`: For interacting with OpenAI's language models.
    * `pypdf`, `python-docx`: For parsing documents.

---

## **Setup and Installation (Ubuntu/Linux)**

This guide provides detailed instructions to set up the project from scratch.

### **1. Prerequisite Installation**

#### **Install Git**

```
sudo apt update
sudo apt install git
```

#### **Install Python 3.12**
```
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:deadsnakes/ppa
sudo apt update
sudo apt install python3.12 python3.12-venv python3-pip
```

#### **Install Poetry**

```
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -
# Add Poetry to your system's PATH as instructed by the installer
export PATH="/home/your-username/.local/bin:$PATH"
# Remember to add this line to your ~/.bashrc or ~/.zshrc file
```

#### **Install Docker and Docker Compose1**

```
# Set up Docker's repository
sudo apt install apt-transport-https ca-certificates curl software-properties-common
curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu/gpg | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /usr/share/keyrings/docker-archive-keyring.gpg
echo "deb [arch=$(dpkg --print-architecture) signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/docker-archive-keyring.gpg] https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu $(lsb_release -cs) stable" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/docker.list > /dev/null

# Install Docker Engine
sudo apt update
sudo apt install docker-ce docker-ce-cli containerd.io docker-buildx-plugin docker-compose-plugin

# Add your user to the docker group (requires logout/login to take effect)
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
```

### **2. Project Setup**

#### **Step 1: Clone the Repository**

```
git clone <your-repository-url>
cd agentic-rag-system
```

#### **Step 2: Configure Python and Install Dependencies**

```
# Tell Poetry to use Python 3.12 for this project
poetry env use python3.12

# Install local dependencies for the UI and ingestion scripts
poetry install
```

#### **Step 3: Set Up Environment Variables**

Create a .env file in the root of the project and add your OpenAI API key.

```
touch .env
```

**.env file contents:**

Refer the .env.example

---

## **How to Run the Application 🚀**

1. **Add Your Documents**: Place the .pdf, .docx, or .txt files you want to chat with into the data/ directory.
2. **Build and Start the Backend**: This command builds the backend Docker image and starts the FastAPI and Weaviate containers.

 ```
 docker compose up --build -d
 ```
 

3. **Ingest Your Data**: Run this script to process your documents and load them into the vector database.
 
 ```
 poetry run python run_ingestion.py
 ```

4. **Launch the UI**: Start the Streamlit user interface.
 
 ```
 poetry run streamlit run ui.py
 ```

 Navigate to **http://localhost:8501** in your browser to start your conversation.

---

## **Future Ideas and Roadmap**

This project has a solid foundation that can be extended with even more powerful agentic capabilities.

* **Implement Query Rewriting**: Add a node to the graph that analyzes the user's query in the context of the conversation and rewrites it to be more optimal for retrieval.
* **Add a Re-ranking Agent**: Implement a node that takes the initially retrieved documents and uses a more powerful Cross-Encoder model to re-rank them for relevance before passing them to the generator.
* **Tool Use**: Extend the agent with the ability to use tools, such as performing a web search if the answer cannot be found in the provided documents.
* **Persistent Memory**: Replace the current InMemorySaver with a persistent checkpointer (like PostgresSaver or RedisSaver) so that conversations can be continued across application restarts.
* **Deployment**: Package and deploy the application to a scalable, production-ready environment like Google Cloud Run or AWS App Runner.

Commit message:

Added section on evaluation framework.

README.md, after:

# **Agentic RAG System: A Production-Grade Conversational AI**

This repository contains the source code for a sophisticated, local-first Agentic Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system. Which means the entire data processing and storage pipeline is designed to run locally, without sending your private documents to a third-party service for indexing or storage.

The application is designed from the ground up to be a production-ready, containerized solution that can ingest custom documents, maintain multi-turn conversations, and provide factually-grounded, cited answers.

This project moves beyond simple RAG chains by implementing a stateful, multi-agent architecture using LangGraph. It includes advanced features like conversational memory, automatic history summarization for token efficiency, and a final grounding-and-safety check to prevent hallucinations and ensure trustworthiness.

---

## **Core Features**

* **Conversational Memory**: The agent remembers the context of previous interactions in a session, allowing for natural, multi-turn follow-up questions.
* **Efficient History Summarization**: To handle long conversations without exceeding token limits, the agent automatically creates rolling summaries of the chat history, ensuring both context retention and cost efficiency.
* **Grounding & Safety Agent**: Every answer is passed through a final validation node that fact-checks the generated response against the source documents to prevent hallucinations.
* **Dynamic Citations**: The safety agent adds specific, numbered citations to the final answer, referencing the source documents that support its claims, which adds a layer of credibility and verifiability.
* **Token Usage Tracking**: The system tracks and displays the token consumption (prompt, completion, and total) for every turn of the conversation, providing clear visibility into API costs.
* **Local-First & Containerized**: The entire application, including the vector database and the backend API, runs locally in a containerized environment using Docker, ensuring consistency and portability.
* **Structured Logging**: All application events are logged in a structured JSON format, making it easy to monitor, query, and analyze the system's behavior in a production environment.
* **Memory-Efficient Ingestion**: The system uses a streaming approach to parse and chunk large documents, ensuring that even very large files can be processed without overwhelming the system's memory.

---

## **System Architecture**

The application is composed of several services that are orchestrated by Docker Compose:

1. **Weaviate Vector Store**: A containerized vector database that stores the embedded document chunks for fast retrieval.
2. **FastAPI Backend**: A containerized backend service that hosts the agentic workflow. It exposes a simple API for the user interface to interact with.
3. **LangGraph Agent**: The core logic of the application, defined as a stateful graph. The graph orchestrates the flow of a query through several nodes: document retrieval, history summarization, answer generation, and a final safety check.
4. **Streamlit UI**: A simple, local web interface that allows users to interact with the backend API in a conversational manner.

---

## **Tech Stack & Key Libraries**

* **Orchestration**: LangGraph, LangChain
* **Backend**: FastAPI, Uvicorn
* **Frontend**: Streamlit
* **Containerization**: Docker, Docker Compose
* **Vector Database**: Weaviate
* **Dependency Management**: Poetry
* **Logging**: `python-json-logger`
* **Key Python Libraries**:
    * `pydantic-settings`: For managing configuration and secrets.
    * `sentence-transformers`: For creating high-quality text embeddings.
    * `langchain-openai`: For interacting with OpenAI's language models.
    * `pypdf`, `python-docx`: For parsing documents.

---

## **Setup and Installation (Ubuntu/Linux)**

This guide provides detailed instructions to set up the project from scratch.

### **1. Prerequisite Installation**

#### **Install Git**

```
sudo apt update
sudo apt install git
```

#### **Install Python 3.12**
```
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:deadsnakes/ppa
sudo apt update
sudo apt install python3.12 python3.12-venv python3-pip
```

#### **Install Poetry**

```
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -
# Add Poetry to your system's PATH as instructed by the installer
export PATH="/home/your-username/.local/bin:$PATH"
# Remember to add this line to your ~/.bashrc or ~/.zshrc file
```

#### **Install Docker and Docker Compose1**

```
# Set up Docker's repository
sudo apt install apt-transport-https ca-certificates curl software-properties-common
curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu/gpg | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /usr/share/keyrings/docker-archive-keyring.gpg
echo "deb [arch=$(dpkg --print-architecture) signed-by=/usr/share/keyrings/docker-archive-keyring.gpg] https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu $(lsb_release -cs) stable" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/docker.list > /dev/null

# Install Docker Engine
sudo apt update
sudo apt install docker-ce docker-ce-cli containerd.io docker-buildx-plugin docker-compose-plugin

# Add your user to the docker group (requires logout/login to take effect)
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
```

### **2. Project Setup**

#### **Step 1: Clone the Repository**

```
git clone <your-repository-url>
cd agentic-rag-system
```

#### **Step 2: Configure Python and Install Dependencies**

```
# Tell Poetry to use Python 3.12 for this project
poetry env use python3.12

# Install local dependencies for the UI and ingestion scripts
poetry install
```

#### **Step 3: Set Up Environment Variables**

Create a .env file in the root of the project and add your OpenAI API key.

```
touch .env
```

**.env file contents:**

Refer the .env.example

---

## **How to Run the Application 🚀**

1. **Add Your Documents**: Place the .pdf, .docx, or .txt files you want to chat with into the data/ directory.
2. **Build and Start the Backend**: This command builds the backend Docker image and starts the FastAPI and Weaviate containers.

 ```
 docker compose up --build -d
 ```
 

3. **Ingest Your Data**: Run this script to process your documents and load them into the vector database.
 
 ```
 poetry run python run_ingestion.py
 ```

4. **Launch the UI**: Start the Streamlit user interface.
 
 ```
 poetry run streamlit run ui.py
 ```

 Navigate to **http://localhost:8501** in your browser to start your conversation.

---

## **Evaluation**

This project includes a built-in evaluation framework using **RAGAS** (Retrieval-Augmented Generation Assessment) to quantitatively measure the performance of the RAG pipeline. This allows for a data-driven approach to improving the system and comparing the impact of different techniques.

The evaluation measures the following key metrics:

* **Faithfulness**: Measures how factually accurate the generated answer is based on the provided context.
* **Answer Relevancy**: Assesses how relevant the generated answer is to the user's question.
* **Context Precision**: Evaluates the signal-to-noise ratio of the retrieved context.
* **Context Recall**: Measures the ability of the retriever to fetch all the necessary information to answer the question.

### **How to Run the Evaluation**

1.  **Generate the Evaluation Results:**
    Run the following command from the root of the project. This will run the RAG chain against a ground truth dataset and save the results to a `ragas_evaluation_results.csv` file.

    ```bash
    poetry run python -m evaluation.evaluate
    ```

2.  **Visualize the Results:**
    To view the results in a user-friendly web interface, run the following command:
    ```bash
    poetry run streamlit run evaluation/evaluation_ui.py
    ```
    This will start a Streamlit application where you can view the evaluation metrics in a clean, interactive table.

---

## **Future Ideas and Roadmap**

This project has a solid foundation that can be extended with even more powerful agentic capabilities.

* **Implement Query Rewriting**: Add a node to the graph that analyzes the user's query in the context of the conversation and rewrites it to be more optimal for retrieval.
* **Add a Re-ranking Agent**: Implement a node that takes the initially retrieved documents and uses a more powerful Cross-Encoder model to re-rank them for relevance before passing them to the generator.
* **Tool Use**: Extend the agent with the ability to use tools, such as performing a web search if the answer cannot be found in the provided documents.
* **Persistent Memory**: Replace the current InMemorySaver with a persistent checkpointer (like PostgresSaver or RedisSaver) so that conversations can be continued across application restarts.
* **Deployment**: Package and deploy the application to a scalable, production-ready environment like Google Cloud Run or AWS App Runner.
